
Python for Data Science – Tutorial for Beginners #1 – Python Basics


If you are learning Data Science, pretty soon you will meet Python. Why is that? 
Because it’s one of the most commonly used data languages.
It’s popular for 3 main reasons:

   1. Python is fairly easy to interpret and learn.
   2. Python handles different data structures very well.
   3. Python has very powerful statistical and data visualization libraries.

In my “Python for Data Science” articles I’ll show you everything you have to know. 
I’ll start from the very basics – so if you have never touched code, don’t worry, you are at the right place. 
I’ll focus only on the data science related part of Python – and I will skip all the unnecessary and impractical trifles. 
We will go step by step and by the end of this tutorial series we will even do some fancy data things – like predictive analytics!

Here we go!
This is a Hands-On Tutorial!

I always prefer learning by doing over learning by reading… If you do the coding part with me on your computer, 
you will understand and recall everything at least 10 times better. Besides, at the end of every article I’ll attach one or two
little exercises, so you can test yourself!
This means, though, that you will need a data server to practice. Follow this tutorial to set one up:

How to install Python, R, SQL and bash to practice data science (LINK)

Note: In the above tutorial we set up Jupyter (with iPython) only. 
Later on we will install other Python libraries – eg. pandas, numpy, scikit, matplotlib – right when they will be needed!
Why should you learn Python for Data Science?

When it comes to learn data coding, you should focus on these four languages:

    1. SQL
    2. Python
    3. R
    4. Bash

Of course, it’s very nice if you have time to learn all four. But if you are newer to this field, 
you have to pick one or two first. I always suggest to start with Python and SQL. Using these two languages, 
you will cover 99% of the data science and analytics problems you’ll have to deal with in the future.

Note: I’ve already written an SQL for Data Analysis tutorial series. 
Go and check it out here: SQL for Data Analysis, episode #1!

Now why is it worth learning Python for Data Science?

    1. It’s easy and fun.
    2. It has many package as suitable for simpler Analytics projects 
       (eg. segmentation, cohort analysis, explorative analytics, etc.) as advanced Data Science projects 
       (eg. building machine learning models)
    3. The job market begs for more data professionals with solid Python knowledge. 
       It means knowing Python will be an extremely competitive element in your CV.

What is Python? Is Python for Data Science only?

I’ll keep the theoretical part short. But there are two things that you have to know about Python before you start using it.

Firstly, Python is a general purpose programming language and it’s not only for Data Science. 
This means, that you don’t have to learn every part of it to be a great data scientist. 
At the same time, if you learn the basics well, you will understand other programming languages too – 
which is always very handy, if you work in IT.

Secondly, Python is a high-level language. It means, that in terms of CPU-time it’s not the most effective language on the planet. But on the other hand it was made to be simple, “user-friendly” and easy to interpret. Thus what you might lose on CPU-time, you might win back on engineering time.
Python 2 vs Python 3 – which one to learn for Data Science?

Maybe you have heard about this Python 2.x vs Python 3.x battle. I won’t go into details here, 
because I’ve written another article about this topic already (here: Python 2 vs Python 3), but the point is:
Python 3 has been around since 2008 – and 95% of the data science related features and libraries have been migrated from Python 2
already. On the other hand Python 2 won’t be supported after 2020. 
So learning Python 2 at this point is like learning Latin – it’s useful in some cases, but the future is for Python 3.

Because of this, all my Python for Data Science tutorials will be written in Python 3.

Note: However, I’ll try to use code that works in both versions whenever possible.

Enough theory! Let’s get to coding!
